# Broad but Personal Thoughts on the Monitoring Guide

## A Note on the Text

The following text is transcribed from a handwritten manuscript with very few edits; it is essentially a rambling draft. I wrote it in Sepetember 2022 and transcribed it in the same month. In some parts the reader will be more burdened with deducing my meaning than I intended; it is the natrue of the writing that seems to flow from my hand. If you wish to know what I mean by 'deducing my meaning', read this paragrpah up to the sentence before this one, but only up to the semi-colon.

Reference to supporting information has not been made, but I beleive that the arguments here follow from from a combination of personal observations and discusssions; the information present in papers by Lindenmayer, and Saunders; the recovery plans for species of australian parrots and cockatoos; and the 'classic' papers in the literature, such as the one by Newton (1994). I have not cross-checked my ideas with a close reading of Goldingay's papers, and this needs to be done.

The terms 'nest-box' and 'tree-hollow' (or 'hollows') are often nested inside the general term 'habitat-structure'. In this text, the term 'habitat structures' means physical structures that are used by vertebrate species in a similar pattern to how they use hollows. The term could be even braoder; that expanded definition resides on the marches of this protocol and is of special interest to me, even though the vast majority of work will not occur there. The term 'cavity-like' or some similar phrasing may also be used to desribe such structures.

'Widlife', 'biodiversity', and 'community' are all used in a way that can usually be read as 'the suite of vertebrate species that rely on tree-hollows and similar habitat structures for their survival or reproduction'.

_Chris_</br>
_Adelaide, 08 September 2022_

---

## Introduction

Many nest-boxes [1] are made and installed each year, mainly to provide habitat structures for wildlife, but also with the intention to educate and delight. Some of the nest boxes are installed by landholders and small organisations such as landcare groups, schools, friends groups, and other NGO's (Non-Government Organisations). While individual efforts are not always large, the cumulative total across all of these participants in the Adelaide region most likely corresponds to large biodiversity outcomes and large investments of resources and personal effort.

Despite nest-box installation projects being widespread in the Adelaide region, there does not appear to be a well known best-pracrice protocol or guide for monitoring the outcomes of these projects. Nest-boxes do not come without their problems. Low uptake, poor breeding success, occupation by feral species, and nest-box collapse have all been raised as issues, and in some cases are well-documented problems. Ideally, any significant effort directed to nest-box installations will be accompanied by a feedback of information to help asses the outcome, and understand any challenges that might be present.

This protocol is an attempt at a broad, flexible system that can be used in different contexts, whilt still providing high-quality information that is easy to chare between groups. It aims to be an ecologically-attuned guide that helps groups to engage in monitoring with confidence that the information consults the questiosn they want to answer, and can be shared with other groups to improve biodiversity more broadly. This protocol is part of collaborative effort to make any standard used the best possible; it is not rigid; it involves exploring improvements all the time, including looking at other practices already in use.

---

## Conceptual Scope and Direction of the Minotoring Protocol

### Note on this section

This section is written in essay prose, but could be distilled into dot-point form.

### Ecological Scope

Many elements of the protocol are to do with habitat structures rather any one target species. The effort of nest-box installations is spread across man target species, and many installations are opportunisitc, being based on whatevr nest-boxes are at hand; the purpose is to increase habitat structures to improve biodiversity in general. Furthermore, nest-boxes are part of a much larger resource available in the habitat, and it is difficult to conceptualise their impact without taking this into account. Many rigorous studies involving species of conservation interest focus on the habitat structure, either inadvertanly or directly acknowledging the interactions between habitat strucutres and the community of wildlife using them as an impotant part of understand the ecology of the target species.

Surveys of nest-boxes installed for at-risk species are often presence/absence surveys - but this is for any occupant, since compeition for nest-sites could be imacting the target species. Meanwhile, several studies of natural hollows used by a target species have extended to hollow used by other species, and unused hollows, in order to understand nest-site requirements. These sorts of studies are done with a target species but contain information which is collected to understand the use the ecology of nest-site use more generally, reflecting the essential role of these nest-sites in the life-cycle, and the potential limitation that comes with nesting in structures such as tree-hollows.

The habitat strucutres that create nest-sites are a crucial resource interacting with a whole community of species. Rigorous studies are able to reflect this understanding (it is analogous to tree-hollow ecology), but nest-box installations are often done casually, or as part of programs that have limited resources for consistent monitoring. The bare minimum seems to be be checking for occupation by target species - a task that requires a survey effort. There does not seem to be a guide to help improve the quality of monitoring, or to help people understand accurately the implications of investing more or less effort. In cases where an installation is general, done for severl species but not one in particualr, even success defined by a simple count of occupation of some species can be problematic. The species different people are interested in can influence which counts they pay attention to, and variations in nest-box design and placement vary, addding complexity to how counts of different species can be interpreted. Even if information is available, it may be difficult to collate and communicate effectively. Paying attention to the habitat strucutre is a part of solving some of these challenges by creating a concpetual base-line unit for building up more complex observations. This does not preculde focusing only on some subset of structure, such as those occupied by a particular species.

The number of nest-box installations and the cumulative resources embodies therein also necessitates attention to the structure as a unit of observation. Nest-boxes are an engineering feat. Being good engineers in conservation come with a particular context: we seek to be _ecosystem_ engineers in the best sense of the word, helping the system to thrive as a whole and giving back more than we take out.

For the above reasons, focusing on structure will be a theme in the protocol, establishing the broader frame of view, and I suspect that this will be signalled in the data-structures that arise from the protocol. The next questions becomes: what structures? Tree-hollow and nest-boxes have been disucssed so far, but the ecology of many specis that occupy tree-hollows shows that these strucutures are just part of a larger suite of habitat structures that can be termed 'nest-sites' or 'shelter-sites'. Lots of species use other artificual structures, a fact that landholders prolifically show interest in and which warrants discussion. Some birds, such as swallows and martins, breed in geological strucutres as well. Rainbow bee-eaters nest in the banks of sandy creek-lines. A Brush-tail possums has been observed using crevices in rocks, and conistently used the depression created by the stump of a fallen mallee tree. All of these nest-sites are contributions to the usable structures in the habitat, and may influence the dynamics of the community of species that use them. The monitoring protocol is accordingly framed to include _all_ habitat structures that may be used as nest-sites.

An immediate challenge is how 'habitat structures that may be used as nest-sites' is defined. Pre-composing a list is never a match for the creativity of wildlife, so the definition of strucutres should be led be observation. However, this will result in a blurriness between a strucutre that cannot be built by a species, and structures that can be built. The nest of woodswallow may use a strucutre that resembles a tree-hollow, but it can also use other parts of a tree's structure. My tentative suggestion is that any occurence of nest-site or shelter behaviour should seen as either reliant on some strucutre that is recognisable as a habitat feature and cannot be made by the occupant, or not. As to what species are considered the guide for what a strucutre is: I suggest that monitoring all vertebrate species, and any species that is a significant competitor with vertebrate species, is ideal (an exclusion may need to be made for species that a burrowers rather than nesters; rainbow bee-eaters may be inlcuded because of their status as birds - I am not sure). Most work will occur within the tree-hollow and nest-box subclass of structure, and focus on birds and mammals, but having the broad scope laid-out will be a necessary foundation to astutely recording community dynamics later on. [2]

The matter of the possum in the tree stump highlights another issue with the types of structures we observe. Many decrepit tree strucutres would not be considered tree-hollows, but it is difficult to draw a line between definitions like 'tree-hollow' and 'stump'. Animals such as micro-bats, owlet nightjars, possums, pardalotes, and wood-swallows challange any narrow definition of tree-hollow. This is further highlighted by the tree hollows changing over time: the malle stump was once a healthy tree; and I have seen woodswallows nesting in the depression remaining ater a trunk bearing a deep hollow broke off from a tree. Species such as bats often use different strucutres that can easily be described 'cavity-like' and 'sraggly', despite our personal impressions about what a suitable structure is, and these strucutres may even be in the same branch of the same tree, just several years apart. The protocol needs ways to acknowledge and deal with structures changing over time. [3]

Consulting the way structures change over time provides the opportunity to study mallee trees more closely. Models of the form and health of trees as they age and senesce are in-use, ranging in complexity from about three categories ( e.g. healthy, senescing, dead) to nine [4]. The models that I am familiar with are insufficient for mallee trees, or at least need adapting, which can be problematically variable. I am not sure if anyone has tackled this lacuna yet.

---

### Anthropological Scope

The importance of monitoring nest-box installations are in the awareness of the community. Monitoring is conducted by NGO groups, and observations relayed by landholders are often good quality [5]. This protocol aims to draw on knowledge from current monitoring, encourage monitoring efforts to be mutually intelligible, and provide guidance on best-practices if someone wants to undertake monitoring. The philosophy of the protocol is to avoid prescribing methods, instead providing guidance based on the best ecological knowledge available. A pertinent topic for offering guidance is what sort of information is needed to compare findings across groups. Detailing the protocol will involve research, consultation, and preferrably in-field testing for new methods. However, I suspect that the key variables will include the frequency and duration, and type of surveys needed to establish occupancy for a species, and that needed to establish absence of occupancy.

Much of this protocol will be dedicated to joining ideas of 'rigorous monitoring' with the mode in which people, especially small groups, operate [6]. Indeed, just discerning how groups do operate is probably more complex than any surverying methodology. Some of the challenges faced by small groups undertaking monitoring may be demonstrated by an example from my own experience. I have installed nest-boxs as part of a landcare group. Monitoring has yet to be formalised for these structures; I have found it necessary to write this protocol just to go about doing that. The nest-boxes were installed as part of a school workshop after they were given to the group. The condition of the nest-boxes was variable, and there was no mechanism designed into them for for attachment to the tree. My short-term interest became how to go about attaching these nest-boxes in various ways. I returned to the site to trial a method of attachment involving theading rubber-covered wire through the nest-box and tightening it around the carved wooden spacers that prevent the tree from being strangled or ringbarked as it grows. The installations and new fixtures had depleted some of the time I had available for the group. <!-- --> While I did go to check on the nest-boxes from time to time to see that the attachment mechanism was working, my visits were opportunistic and I did not record the details of my surveys. Lack of energy and no signs of occupancy may have contributed to my lack of enthusiams for recording visits. I was also simply not confident that findings from these nest-boxes would contribute to management, since the initial installation had been opportunistic and for education more than anything else. For some periods I also was out of Adelaide, and to my knowledge, visitiations by other group members were not recorded. Other people will behave differently to myself, and will hopefully be more resilient and optimistic. The result of my lapses is a blurriness around the dates that nest-boxes were available for wildlife, and an absence of records showing that the nest-boxes were _not_ used. Well-kept records would not take much more effor than the site visits, and would add consistency to how we might review the installation. A monitoring protocol could also help to spread the load of monitoring by making the requirements of a check easy to share with others. Up until this point I would not have had the confidence to rely on another person to take over my own checks, not because other people are not capable, but becase my own method is not defined. Among oher things, I rely on signs of wear around the entrance, strands of fur, climbing marks on the tree, and the presence and behaviour or birds in the immediate environment. Another person might have access to equipment to video or actually look inside a nest box, which would be useful for checking for nesting mateiral; or they might have the chance to spend a dawn or dusk period watching the nest box for signs of activity. I feel compelled to say that the latter method is easily applicable to natural hollows, while the former is prone to failing in this case. Setting up conventions for monitoring is a lot to do for only a few nest-boxes, but once in place the conventions can be used across the group, increasing mutal understanding of how to monitor other locations. If the conventions set up are the best possible, they can be collated into a best practice protocol or guide to be used across many groups, and this is exaclty what I am working towards here.

A monitoring protocol should be crafted to empower people by translating efforts to information that is reliable and sharable. This purposes is realed to the quality of monitoring, but not equivalent to it. The bvery best stnadards of monitoriung are always shifting as they are reviewed, and they are difficult to define. They may also be reliant on technology or equipment that some people will have, and others will not. More pertinent is the fact that people have limited and unpredictable availability. This protocol is people-centric, while being informed by the science of field-ecology. Method which are too demanding will be self-defeating. The manifestation of rigour and quality in this protocol has to be sensitive to people and be accessible on the ground. This protocol will therefore focus on exploring and articulating the different ways surveys can be done, and their exact outcomes. Most of the information therein is common sense: too long spent without checking a nest-site means an important event might be misssed; a twilight vigil on a hollow in combination with daylight surveying may give more certainty about occupation status that the latter alone; a few brief walkthroughs by an expereienced serveyor can lead to reocmmendations for confirming breeding activity. There are people with an acute knowledge of all of these methods. I hope they will be able to act as mentors when it comes to the matter of this project. Some standardisation is still necessary, so that everyone is working towards the same purpose, can share information and collaborate, and can establish optimum methods. Standards are good insofar as they are adaptive. The monitoring protocol also goes by the name of a best-practice guide. Those words should be taken to heart. Embracng a collaborative, open-source approach is at the fore of my mind in writing this section. I can conjure some method, but I will need others to be contributing to the protocol so that I can confidently recommend it with confidence that it is the best possible practice.

---

### Logistical Scope

Some discussion of logistics is warranted here, to start bringing together the ideas outlined in the ecological scope and anthropological scope. These secttions were already tending towards logistics: this essay is application-focused. The discussion on the anthropological scope may lead to the impression that the protocol is a distillation of survey methods. This is partly true, but for the most part the protocol is about building a framework in which to put the survey methods, and which will establish some of the above thoery in practice.

How habitat structures are labelled and identified is something that I suspect will set a pattern for how people interact with a protocol. How will record keeping be coordinated? How will it reflect habitat structures nested within structures (hollows within trees)? How will it reflect change in structures over time? I have only begun to think about these things. My suggestion is that habitat structure has a unique identifier: a name with a particular syntax, involving modular component which are descriptive and indicate physical location. The syntax I propose is addressed-like, based on post-code locations and site locations. For a specific reserve or field site, the name of the site may comes first, followed by a post-cose that clarifies the location (names such as 'The Knoll' are autochthonous and may be replicated). However, sites can also be nested within postcodes; nesting in a postcode is an essential element because one needs to be able to enter any habitat structure into the system, even if it is a lone tree hollow discovered by chnance (and even if it is not occupied!). Further descriptions can be nested within the post-code, such as the road name or property name; none specied locations belong to the post code in general, though, and it is important to have a reserved term such as 'general' or 'misc' for these [7]. This locational name is followed by the nest site name, which can be a number or a descriptive name, and is prefixed by a unique symbol to differentiate it from the elements of the location address. There are several advantages to establishing a robust syntax. Nest sites can be named uniquely but with complete freedom, and any double-up of records or other confusions are limited ot a certain area. The names are descriptive of location and therefore somewhat corellated to habitat; and the specific site can be highlighted, which may be an asset for engaging communitiies, without loosing any location information.

The way the units are observation are defined can influence the mode of the whole information system, so this aspect should also reflect the ecology of habitat structures. As outlined above, I believe that observing structures in combination with wildlife is foundational (rather than being biased to wildlife), and go on to observe that habitat structures are dynamic and are layered [8]. Nest sites need to be nested within structures wherever applicable in the naming syntax. In particular, tree hollows need to be nested within trees. Cavities in a cliff face may be nested within the cliff as a habitat structure, but in this case I suspect that it will often be useful for someone to observe the cliff face as a grouped unit - the identifier syntax can facilitate this. Also outlined in the ecological scope is the fact that structures change over time. It must be considered: when does a tree hollow become a new thing? Mapping the history of a nest site is also applicable to nest boxes, which may be modified in-situ (this has been done to prevent predation). I do not have an answer to the question, and feel some arbitary lines are inevitable. A change in the branch order of a tree hollow or its entrance ccomes to mind as a significant moment in the history of the strucutre.

Another core part of the protocl's logistics which will have a disproportionate impact is the decision processes that pertain to what is recorded and how often. A large part of the work ahead is to figure out how often certain structures need to be checked and to ascertain things like the breeding success of the occupant. The frequency and duration of the checks interact with the skill of the observer and the tools on hand. But _what_ is recoreded in the first place is also impfortant. Referring to the above discussion about when a tree-hollow becomes a new thing, we can also recognise that it is always changing. A change I have seen many times is a hollow-bearing branch transitioning from living to dead. It is known that hollows in live branches are more stable micro-climates than hollown in dead branches. Presumably there is an intermediary state as the cork tissue deteriorates. The mircro-climates of nest sites is important in the discourse on nest boxes and breeding success. Some nest boxes have been documented as providing poorly regulaged micro-climates and - quite distressingly - being prone to overheating. Concerns about overheated nest sites have also been voiced for tree-martins and pardalotes that nest in the metal cross-poles at the top of stobey poles. The temperature of these particular nest sites may be pivotal, especially as fledglings are often inside during early summer. Incorporating variables that relate to temperature is central to understanding the usability of habitat structures more broadly. My view is that checking that nest boxes are places of successful breeding important, but maintaining awareness of other artificial habitat structures and natural tree hollows is equally important; and with the micro-climates of strucutres being a concern, it would be innane not to note on an annual basis whether a hollow is in a liviing or dead branch. However, there are many other variables that can quickly add up. Without some sort of protocol it is too easy to not record important variables because of the sheer number of things that are possible to record, or to record different variables than to other groups or individiuals that are doing similar work. Once information is not recorded, it is hard to obtain it retrospectively. Just thinking about the task is more work than referring to a rather detailed best-practice guide. Not only is this a missed opportunity for those doing the installations - it also dilutes the impact of excellent monitoring which is being done, becase the findings cannot be compared as widely as one would wish.

Much of the work ahead will be similar to thinking oabout the dead branch. A few moments of minitoring has to be artfully related to the goals of individuals and the ecology of habitat structures.

The outputs for the protocol will be a small booklet which includes background to the project, contacts and resources, a few words on theoery, and a detailed guide on navigating from this point to on-ground surverying. All the necessary options of data sheets will be supplied as well, all available in tierh the form of a field book or loose leaves. All documents will be available digitally in a repository for the project. The repository is actually the key output, because it will be the space where meta-data decisions are fully documented, and wehre community contributions can interface with the architecture of the project. The repository will one day, I hope, have at least the unique name for every nest box and tree hollow that is being monitored in the Adelaide region.

## Conclusion

What I have done here is touch on the _'Who, What, When, Where, How, Why'_ of the project, though I did not set out to do that. Far more important to me was the opportunity to outline the mode and scope of the protocol's founding idea, placing these in the context of communities - of people and biodiversity.

---

## Notes

[1] 'Nest box' is used here as a generic term for an installed habitat strucutre that replicates natural structures used by wildlife as nest-sites or shelter. It is a broad term, but in most cases it refers strucutures made to replace tree-hollows.</br>
[2] This paragraph is an interjection into the manuscript. It is compiled from some earlier notes.</br>
[3] Some sentences were added to flesh out this paragraph.</br>
[4] If memory serves.</br>
[5] 'observations' instead of 'records'. One of the purposes of this protocol is to create a tool-kit for communicating observations in detailed qualitative and quantitative terms, should members of the public wish to go down this route but do not know how, or are wary that investing extra effort will not lead to communicable information.</br>
[6] It will be found that 'rigorous monitoring' is redundant without discussing the implications of doing more rigorous monitotoring.</br>
[7] It is important to provide a term for the 'general' location, since the _lack_ of a speciifc site is then clear - much more so than being implied by the absence of a site only.</br>
[8] Not sure if I have spoken on those things in as many words.</br>

