# Meta-data

## Introduction
This document outlines what each variable means and the way it should be filled out if it were hypothetically on a data-sheet in front of you — or at least it tries to make a start on this task.

This document was begin in October 2022 and is likely to be constantly updated for quite some time.

---
## Some Background Reading for this Document
The meta-data is written in the context of a goal for this protocol that I have developed over the first half of October 2022: that the protocol can be used without any hard infrastrucutre: only knowledge is needed, and given that, one can run the thing in any notebook. I probably feel this is a whorthwhile goal because I tend to have been running the thing in whatever notebook I have on me at the time.

The concept of layers is used in the data-structure of this protocol. Do not worry too much if mention of that does not seem to make sense on its own: the idea of layers in this protocol needs to be written and explained at some point, not to mentioned trailed and reviewed.

The meta-data is extrmely incomplete. The first section('Priority Variables') is the things that I thought might be important to get squared up first to enable monitoring to be assimilated into the protocol. It is notable that these do not include variables like nest-box material, or tree-hollow height. I hope that more sophisticated measurements can be built on the foundations here.

Things in square brackets are comments from me to you.

~ Chris, 23 Octover 2022

---
## Priority Variables
The guiding question behind this section is "What cannot be easily reconstructed if it is not recorded fairly soon?" An example is the date of installation. That is easy to remeber if it was yesterday, but harder if it was three weeks ago and during a holiday period. Another is identity: you saw a lorikeet here four weeks ago, but which is these ten identical boxes was it in? One can usually remember something like that, but it is bad practice to leave it unrecorded. Constrastingly, the height of a nest-box is stable unless an action is taken to change it, or it falls down: a much more distinct event than the passage of time.

~ Chris, 23 Octover 2022

---
### Structure Layer
**Nest-site Structure Name**<br>
This is recommended because it helps to organise the other variables here. It can also _enhance_ the other variables here, such as helping to flag similar near-by structures to someone trying to locate a structure based on location.

Syntax:<br>
_Postcode.Site.*TreeName.+NestSiteName-Type_

- Postcode and site may be interchangeable, if the site is a large reserve.
- TreeName is not always needed. It is acrtually the name for any structure that might contain multiple nest-sites. Therefore, it could be a tree, or something like a building. This is prefixed by an asterisk.
- NestSiteName is the name for the nest site. This is prefixed by a plus-sign, and appended by the Type of the structure.
- The Type is a code that indicates the type of the structure. 'H' mean hollow, 'NB' means nest-box, and 'AS' means artifical structure, including buildings; there will be other codes. 
- The NestSiteName must be unique: the Type does not impact on this criteria; likewise for TreeName.
- For all of these names, I use Camel Case. This is where all words start with a capital, and there are no spaces. Therefore, 'Blue Gum Track' becomes 'BlueGumTrack', or if abbreviated you might say 'BGTrack'.
- Numbers are not necessary but they are useful and there is no reason not to use them aside from personal preference for memorable, descriptive names.

A surevy may choose to record the site at the top, and then one need only write: — +NestSiteName

**Location**<br>
- GPS (Global Positioning System) coordiantes — Lattitude and Longitude [1] to _six decimal places_. The coordiante system needs clarification. What-three-words may be used as an add-on but not a replacement. If coordinates are unavalable, two things are necessary: a written description to find location, and either a photo or sufficient sketch (see 'Identity' varaible).

**Identity**<br>
- Identifying photos of nest-site structure, with surrounding context so that similar strucutres can be distinguished from each other, and the nest-site can be found easily in the environemtn.
- Other photos at discretion. This also relates to condition and signs of wear.
- If photos are unavailable, a sufficient description and sketch must be included. The test for sufficiency is replicability: people familair with the protocol but otherwise niave to the nest-sites must be able to find them.

**Date of First Observation**<br>
- Given to the day. [2]

This is the entry-point of the observations into the protocol. The default is that this is the point where observations are done in the context of the protocol. Past observations are outlined, with reference to past observations, in the 'Observation History' variable. In the case where one is sure that the observations constitute a clear knowledge of occupancy, these may be entered into the protocol, with appropriate explanatory notes in the 'Observation History' variable.

**Observation History**<br>
[Incomplete: but see 'Date of First Observation' variable]

**Date of Installation**<br>
- The date that the structure came into existence in it's current form and locale. 
- Given to whatever accuracy is possible.
- This variable may be assimilated into 'Structure History'
 
[The mechanism for deciding when a strucutre 'comes into existence' is partly explored in the essay called 'Broad Thoughts and Principles'. However, this will eventually be discussed in all the required detail in it's own appendix.]

**Structre History**<br>
- Link to past strucutres
- Record of any interesting fixes, minor improvements, donwn-time, etc.

---
### Survey Layer: Instantaneous
**Survey Type Definition**<br>
The following are some ideas for the types of surveys:
- **Lightning**: 20 min area survey - list site and structures covered
- **Short**: 40 min area survey - list site and structures covered
- **Long**: >90 min 
- **Dusk Watch**: >40 min Hollow-watch at dusk - list structures covered
- **Dusk Check**: <40 min Hollow-watch at dusk to follow up on suspected mammal occupation - list structures covered
- **Dawn Watch**: 40 min Hollow-owatch at morning - list structures covered
- **Walk-through**: Site walk - list site and structures covered
- **Familiar**: Continual proximity (e.g. site visible from kitchen, r on a regular commute) - list structures covered
- **Opportunisitc**: Opportunistic - list site and structures covered

Most of these entail a presence/absence approach, and this is why the structures have to be listed in some way. However, it is also a part of the protocol that one can use their natural history skills to hone survey priorities. Therefore, there needs to be a way of recording site-walk surveys without listing structures, but instead focusing on bird-life and opportunistic observations. It may be possible to distinguish between a general survey and nest-site focused checks by adding some signifier after the survey type. This could also be useful for the 20 min survey, which is very short.

Example:

>— — — Long — — — — — 23/10, 7.30 am — _
>- 5066.HazelwoodPark — 
>   -  +ThinRG-H &emsp; Lorikeet: pair attend nest; Fledgling Down.
>   -  *BigCreek.+Elbow1-H &emsp; No signs. [this tree name is given because Elbow is a common desciptive name]
>   -  +TallPossum-H &emsp; No signs [of fresh fur around entrance]
>   -  Yellow Tail fly-over; no signs of descent
>   -  Large fungus still present at BranchDrop Tree, IMG_2734  [here the surveyor has done something novel, and added a tree that is not a hollow at all, but a _proto structure_ ][3]
>
><br>
>
>— — — Dusk Check — — — 23/10, 7.30 pm - 8.10 pm
>- 5055.HazelwoodPark.*TallPossum.~~+TallPossum~~
>   - +MicroBatSpout1-H       Micro-bat emerged.  [this is a new chance discovery: that is the watch was changed from the holllow to the whole tree]
>   - +TallPossum-H   Possum with joey on back emerged. Joey now 1/2 length of mother.

---
### Survey Layer: Long Term

This layer is abstract because its time dimension is longer than the actual survey efforts. The survey effort it describes is the frequency and consistency of effort across long time periods, such as a season.

Each survey effort results in a type of check on a nest-site and the date. If the goal is to survey a certain hollow monthly, then the Long term layer might look something like this:

>- 5066.HazewlwoodPark — Survey Monthly through main breeding (Aug-Dec)
Aug: Y , Sep: Y , Oct: Y , Nov: &emsp; , Dec:&emsp;
>
>- 5066.HazelwoodPark — 
>   -  +ThinRG-H      Aug: Y , Sep: Y , Oct: Y , Nov: &emsp; , Dec:&emsp;
>   -  *BigCreek.+Elbow1-H       Aug: Y , Sep: Y , Oct: Y , Nov: &emsp; , Dec:&emsp;
>   -  +TallPossum-H      Aug: Y , Sep: Y , Oct: Y , Nov: &emsp; , Dec:&emsp;
>    -  +MicroBatSpout1-H      N/A —  Oct: Y , Nov: &emsp; , Dec:&emsp;

This sort of thing is very rigorous and I am still exploring how the best way to coordinate these long-term efforts are. The question is: what tools are necessary to make it run smoothly? I am used to cross-indexing notes by hand but other might find it awkward.

---
## Notes
[1] I prefer lattitude and longitude outside of scientific survey teams, because on many occassions where Eastings and Northings have been used there have been translation issues. I have even had to deal with botched gps data because of the conversion betwen these two, and that mistake originated from within an institution.

[2] At no point anywhere in the protocol can the date be written in numbers and include the month before the day.

[3] The ability to place auxillary notes that pertain to tree-hollows in the protocol is one of my goals.