When considering the survey layers, I realised one of the difficulties with surveying tree hollows accurately. The quirk lies in the occupancy variable, which I previously took for granted. 

Looking at occupancy of a tree hollow in terms of layers, it suddenly becomes hard to define. In some ways, occupancy seems like survey layer, because it is something we observe being absent one day, but present the next; it is somewhat transient. However, occupancy is also something that lasts. We generally know that a hollow or nest box is occupied for a round of breeding, or for the time being (whatever span that may be). This would place it in an intermediate sort of time frame, which I would like to reflect in monitoring protocol. Even resolving on that does not overcome my sense of uneasiness about the occupancy variable, though. There seems to be even more transience than what I have described. It is not just that a nest-site may become occupied during a season — there is also a similar phenomenon going on with whether we _know_ it is occupied. How many times have I been suddenly surprised at finding a tree hollow that I thought empty to be occupied with chicks? One has to adjust their understanding of reality completely and immediately. The other survey layers are not liable to such instability. Even surveying birds and seeing an unexpected species is not unstable: in that case, one is simply observing. That is the thing about occupation: it is _based_ on observation, but it is actually a state of understanding that is quite abstract; it is summary data based on observational data such as observing fledgling chicks.

I suggest that the occupancy variable be approached with some sensitivity. Specifically, I think that it should be built on the foundations of observations. It is best practice to never specify occupancy of a nest-site without linking it to some sort of observation. The way the observation itself came about therefore become paramount. Was it a walkthrough survey? Was it a short one or a long one? Was the nest-site in question watched for a long time at dusk, or only for a few minutes during the day? Was it tapped on to flush out any birds? Such questions are incredibly important when it comes to establishing the absence of occupation. It is fair to say that with either rigorous ground-based surveying or equipment-aided surveying, or both, absence of occupation could be ascertained. However, we must be aware of what the survey effort was.

All this is quite intuitive, and it boils down to focusing on making good observations and being clear about what you did — the simplicity of science! However, I have greatly enjoyed using the concept of survey-layers for this thought experiment.